---
title: 'Spilling coffee on a laptop taught me a lesson (but not the one you think)'
excerpt: 'A cautionary tale about not waiting for things to be perfect before you do them.'
date: '2020-06-10T00:00:00.322Z'
---

<p data-block-key="pm93m">I use my own laptop for &quot;personal&quot; projects, such as this blog, but for ones related to work, obviously I do them on the laptop provided by my employer. When I started my Python course, I used my work laptop, as it was newer and faster. I could finally install VSCode, which changed my life, kinda.</p><p data-block-key="y0ddg">In a fit of excitement, I&#x27;d created a repository on GitHub I could specifically keep my course notes and code snippets in. However, before the Coffee Incident, I had not yet initialised it.</p><p data-block-key="6150o">The reason for this was that I cringed at the idea of people seeing comments in my code for &quot;basic&quot; stuff, like they would then judge me and conclude that I wasn&#x27;t good enough. Wasn&#x27;t good enough to be a developer. My intent had been to look over my files again before committing them, remove any &quot;stupid&quot; comments and wrong answers, and then they&#x27;d be good to go. But who has time for that? There was some part of my mind that wanted to keep believing I had that time, even though the reality of everyday life constantly proved otherwise.</p><p data-block-key="b3xtn">So I just kept putting it off until one day, a careless motion of the hand sent a half-full cup of coffee splattering onto the keyboard of my WORK LAPTOP. I shrieked (I deal with unexpected conflict really well). I turned it upside down, unplugged it, dashed into the kitchen to grab a tea-towel to dab it. The sound gradually faded, then the visuals, then the white Apple logo appeared on a black screen. Then there was nothing.</p><p data-block-key="9yvmo">I turned the laptop upside down and laid it down on the sofa, tea towel underneath, while frantically googling what else could be done, but I feared the worst.</p><p data-block-key="tv0c1">Needless to say, the notes I&#x27;d been making during class — not just that day, but in general — were gone. All the ways I&#x27;d explained concepts to myself in ways made sense to me were gone. I started spiralling; I was now going to fail the exam for sure, because even if I read the slides the tutor uploads after each class, that wasn&#x27;t necessarily going to jog my memory about the specific way I remember certain things. What was the point in even carrying on learning programming?</p><p data-block-key="t7v13">Like I said, I&#x27;d set up a repo for these notes, but just never bothered to commit them because I was waiting for perfection. Yes, yes, you can make private repositories, but that wasn&#x27;t the point; if I ever made it public, people would still be able to see the history (indeed, one could argue that is sort of the point of a repository). The thought of this was unbearable for me, because it hurts to fail or look foolish in front of others, even at times when it&#x27;s really unlikely that anyone would actually give a shit. And as we can see from this example, this is a self-sabotaging habit.</p><p data-block-key="46fe5">Basically, it seems I liked the <i>idea</i> of having the code up there more (creating the repo) than actually having it there potentially up for scrutiny (putting off committing it).</p><p data-block-key="yzl3h">This taught me a lesson I&#x27;ll take with me into my career: that the most important thing is actually learning, not worrying about people&#x27;s opinion of you while you&#x27;re learning. By not uploading my code to GitHub, I missed a trick; not only in the potential loss of data, but also because I was depriving myself of the opportunity to look back in, say, a year, and see how much progress I&#x27;d made with my code.</p><p data-block-key="gw4lj">Being unfocused — not just in terms of the location of my hand in relation to the coffee that was on the table, about 30 deadly centimetres from the laptop keyboard — was hindering me in my progress. I know that sounds obvious, but the specific <i>way</i> in which you&#x27;re unfocused is often clear to everyone around you but not yourself.</p><p data-block-key="vcw79">In the end, I got off very lucky. After a few days, the login screen came up; I was just able to salvage some files before the battery ran out (and immediately committed them to a private repo, needless to say). My employer covered the costs of getting it looked at by a professional and, after it transpired that a repair would be more expensive than a new machine, provided me with another laptop.</p><p data-block-key="5j2ol">Above all, I learnt that when accidents happen — and they do happen — I have to be gentle with myself. That also means I need to accept the possibility of not being perfect. It&#x27;s one of the reasons why I started this blog, so I can document my journey to becoming a developer and expose this process, which can be very frustrating and humbling.</p><p data-block-key="o6l3m">Something I haven&#x27;t mentioned, though, is that on the whole, this blog is nowhere near the stage I want it to be at. I&#x27;m still struggling with implementing StreamFields, which is Wagtail&#x27;s signature feature, so that I can display images and code blocks decently. I&#x27;ve spent whole afternoons and evenings trying to figure out the problem. I&#x27;ve had countless flashes of &quot;genius&quot; that turned out to be red herrings. And still, I keep on publishing posts here, even though the actual presentation of my blog is not exactly how I&#x27;d like it to be. Even though my first instinct is to just wait until I&#x27;ve sorted everything out.</p><p data-block-key="lw2oi">It&#x27;s not easy to admit this, really. But I consider the Coffee Incident a milestone in learning not to care how it looks and just getting on with it.</p>
